# May 22 

## Prethermalization

Based on 

1. Dmitry Abanin, Wojciech De Roeck, Wen Wei Ho, and Francois Huveneers, [Phys. Rev. B 95, 014112 (2017)](https://journals.aps.org/prb/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevB.95.014112).
2. Dmitry Abanin, Wojciech De Roeck, Wen Wei Ho, and Francois Huveneers, [Communications in Mathematical Physics volume 354, pages 809–827 (2017)](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00220-017-2930-x).

### Effective Hamiltonian in the rotating frame

Based on [[Phys. Rev. B 95, 014112 (2017)](https://journals.aps.org/prb/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevB.95.014112)]. Consider the Floquet system $H(t) = H_0+V(t)$ with high-driven frequency $\nu = 2\pi/T$. We will further assume $\int_0^T dt\ V(t) = 0$ since otherwise it can be absorbed into the static Hamiltonian. We summarize a systematic construction for an effective Hamiltonian that is close to a static one.

Consider a periodic unitary $Q(t)$ satisfying $Q(t+T)=Q(t)$. If we transform the system's wave function $\psi(t)$ to $\varphi(t) \equiv Q(t)\psi(t)$, the effective Hamiltonian under such a rotating frame is of the form
$$
H'(t) = Q^\dagger H(t) Q - i Q^\dagger \partial_t Q.
$$
We aim to find an optimal rotation $Q(t)$ order by order. For this purpose, it convenient to define $Q = e^\Omega$, and that $\Omega$ has the series expansion $\Omega=\sum_{q=1}^{n_*} \Omega_q$, where $\Omega_q = O(T^q)$.
$$
H'(t) = e^{-\Omega} H(t) e^{\Omega} - i e^{-\Omega} \partial_t e^{\Omega} = e^{-\operatorname{ad}_\Omega}[H_0+V(t)] -i\frac{1-e^{-\operatorname{ad}_\Omega}}{\operatorname{ad}_\Omega}\partial_t \Omega.
$$
We have define $\operatorname{ad}_\Omega A \equiv [\Omega, A]$. Note that the final expression of comes from
$$
e^{-\Omega} \partial_t e^{\Omega} = \int_0^1 ds \ e^{-s\Omega} (\partial_t \Omega) e^{s\Omega} = \int_0^1 ds \ e^{-s\operatorname{ad}_\Omega} (\partial_t \Omega),
$$
Now we are going to expand $H'(t)$ recursively.
$$
H'(t) = \sum_{q=0}^\infty \frac{(-\operatorname{ad}_\Omega)^q}{q!} [H_0+V(t)] +i\frac{(-\operatorname{ad}_\Omega)^q}{(q+1)!}.
$$
In the zeroth order, the Hamiltonian is $H'(t) = H_0+V(t) -i\partial_t \Omega$. To minimize the time dependence, we choose
$$
\Omega_1(t) = -i \int_0^t dt' V(t').
$$
Therefore, in the first order,
$$
H'(t) = H_0+V(t) +i \int_0^t dt'\ [V(t'),H_0] +\frac{i}{2} \int_0^t dt'\ [V(t'), V(t)] + O(T^2).
$$
**Claim**: The first-order static correction is
$$
\bar H^{(1)} \equiv \int_0^T dt\ H^{(1)}(t) 
= \frac{i}{2T}\int_0^T dt_1 \int_0^{t_1} dt_2 \ [H(t_1), H(t_2],
$$
which agrees with the Magnus expansion.
*Proof.* let us expand the commutator:
$$
\int_0^T dt_1 \int_0^{t_1} dt_2 \left[H(t_1), H(t_2) \right] 
	= \int_0^T dt_1 \int_0^{t_1} dt_2 \left[V(t_1), H_0 \right] + \left[H_0, V(t_2) \right] +  \left[V(t_1), V(t_2) \right].
$$
We use the fact:
$$
\begin{aligned}
	\int_0^T dt_1 \int_0^{t_1} dt_2 \left[H_0, V(t_2) \right]
	&= \int_0^T dt_2 \int_{t_2}^T dt_1 \left[H_0, V(t_2) \right]
	= T \left[H_0, \int_0^T dt\ V(t) \right] - \int_0^T dt\ t\left[H_0, V(t) \right] \\
	&= \int_0^T dt\ t\left[V(t), H_0 \right] 
	= \int_0^T dt_1\ \int_0^{t_1} dt_2 \left[V(t_1), H_0 \right].
\end{aligned}
$$
Therefore
$$
\frac{i}{2T}\int_0^T dt_1 \int_0^{t_1} dt_2 \left[H(t_1), H(t_2) \right] 
	= \left(\frac{1}{T}\int_0^T dt_1\right) \int_0^{t_1} dt_2 \left\{i\left[V(t_1), H_0 \right] +  \frac{i}{2}\left[V(t_1), V(t_2) \right]\right\},
$$
which agrees with the definition of $\bar H^{(1)}$.



If we manage to calculate the expansion to the infinite order, we will get
$$
H'(t) = H_0 + \bar H_1 + V_1(t),
$$
Where $\bar H_1 = \sum_q \bar H^{(q)}$, which is a quasi-local Hamiltonian.  The remaining time-dependent term $V_1(t)$ will be of the order $O(T)$.

### General recursive expansion

The effective Hamiltonian $H'$ can be regarded as another Floquet system, and we can apply further rotation to reduce the order of time-dependent terms. The procedure goes on recursively:
$$
\begin{aligned}
H'(t) &= H_0 +\bar H_1 +V_1(t),\quad V_1 \sim O(T), \\
H''(t) &= H_0 +\bar H_1 + \bar H_2 + V_2(t),\quad V_2 \sim O(T^2), \\
H^{(n_*)}(t) &= H_0 + \sum_{n=1}^{n_*}\bar H_n + V_{n_*}(t),\quad V_{n_*} \sim O(T^{n_*}).
\end{aligned}
$$
Note that there is an optimal order $n_*$ for this procedure, since the order of $T$ shall be balanced with the growing prefactor. We can systematically generate $\bar H_n$ using the recursive relation [[Communications in Mathematical Physics volume 354, pages 809–827 (2017)](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00220-017-2930-x)]:
$$
\begin{aligned}
\bar H_n &:= \frac{1}{T} \int_0^T H_n(t), \\ 
V_n(t) &:= H_n(t)-\bar H_n, \\
\Omega_n(t) &:= -i\int_0^t dt\ V_n(t),\\
H_{n+1}(t) &:= \mathrm{e}^{-\Omega_n(t)} H_n(t) \mathrm{e}^{\Omega_n(t)}-\mathrm{ie}^{-\Omega_n(t)} \partial_t \mathrm{e}^{\Omega_n(t)}.
\end{aligned}
$$
We also remark in each order, we can expand the static part to the order $O(T^{n_*})$, and the static Hamiltonian is strictly local.

### Time-independent Hamiltonian

Consider the Hamiltonian
$$
H = \nu N + H_0,
$$
with $\nu$ 
