# May 23

## I. Khemani arXiv:2305.11940

Joaquin F. Rodriguez-Nieva, Cheryne Jonay, Vedika Khemani, Quantifying chaos through distributions of entanglement, [arXiv:2305.11940](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11940). 

The authors consider the distributions of the entanglement entropy in chaotic models and use the relative entropy
$$
D_{\mathrm{KL}}\left(P_{\mathrm{E}}, P_{\mathrm{R}}\right)=\int d S_A P_{\mathrm{E}}\left(S_A\right) \log \frac{P_{\mathrm{E}}\left(S_A\right)}{P_{\mathrm{R}}\left(S_A\right)} \geq 0
$$
to measure the distance of entanglement distribution $P_E$ from RMT reference $P_R$. The reference ensemble is Page distribution for random Floquet circuits (FRC) and is Bianchi-Dona (BD) distribution for Hamiltonian systems.

### Page distribution

A pure state with bipartite regions $A$ and $B$ has the general form
$$
|\psi\rangle=\sum_{i=1}^{d_A} \sum_{j=1}^{d_B} C_{i, j}|i\rangle \otimes|j\rangle,
$$
where $C_{ij}$ can be regarded as belonging to random matrix ensembles of GOE/GUE. The authors refer to Ref. [[Phys. Rev. D 100, 105010 (2019)](https://journals.aps.org/prd/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevD.100.105010)] for the calculation of the entanglement entropy distribution. The referred paper also refers to

- S. K. Foong and S. Kanno, Proof of Page’s Conjecture on the Average Entropy of a Subsystem, [Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 1148 (1994)](https://journals.aps.org/prl/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevLett.72.1148).
- J. Sánchez-Ruiz, Simple proof of page’s conjecture on the average entropy of a subsystem, [Phys. Rev. E 52, 5653 (1995)](https://journals.aps.org/pre/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevE.52.5653). 
- S. Sen, Average Entropy of a Subsystem, [Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 1 (1996)](https://journals.aps.org/prl/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.1).
- J. P. Dyer, Divergence of Lubkin’s series for a quantum subsystem’s mean entropy, [arXiv:1406.5776](https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.5776). 

The derivation is nontrivial, but the final result is
$$
\left\langle S_A\right\rangle=\Psi\left(d_A d_B+1\right)-\Psi\left(d_B+1\right)-\frac{d_A-1}{2 d_B},
$$
where $\Psi(x) = \Gamma'(x)/\Gamma(x)=[\ln\Gamma(x)]'$ is the [digamma function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digamma_function). In the TDL where $L_A,L_B\rightarrow\infty$ and $L_A/L$ approaches a finite constant $f$. Using the fact $\Psi(x+1) = \Psi(x)+1/x$, the limit is
$$
\left\langle S_A\right\rangle_{\mathrm{P}} \equiv \mu_{\mathrm{P}}(f) 
\approx \int_{d_B}^{d_A d_B} \frac{dx}{x}-\frac{d_A}{2 d_B} =\log \left(d_A\right)-\frac{d_A}{2 d_B}.
$$
For a system of qubits, this reduces to $\mu_{\mathrm{P}}(f) \approx f L \log (2)-2^{-L(1-2 f)-1}$. The first term is the volume law term while the second term is the 'Page correction' which is exponentially small when $f<1 / 2$. For $f=1 / 2$, it gives rise to a 'half-bit' shift:
$$
\mu_{\mathrm{P}}\left(f=\frac{1}{2}\right) \approx \frac{L}{2} \log (2)-\frac{1}{2}.
$$
The variance of the entanglement entropy distribution $\sigma_{\mathrm{P}}^2=\left\langle S_A^2\right\rangle-\left\langle S_A\right\rangle^2$ is given by
$$
\sigma_{\mathrm{P}}^2= \frac{d_A+d_B}{d_A d_B+1} \Psi^{\prime}\left(d_B+1\right)
-\Psi^{\prime}\left(d_A d_B+1\right) 
-\frac{\left(d_A-1\right)\left(d_A+2 d_B-1\right)}{4 d_B^2\left(d_A d_B+1\right)}.
$$
The asymptotic expression in the limit of $L \rightarrow$ $\infty$ and fixed $f=L_A / L$ is given by
$$
\sigma_{\mathrm{P}}^2(f) \approx\left(\frac{1}{2}-\frac{1}{4} \delta_{f, \frac{1}{2}}\right) \frac{1}{d_B^2}=\left(\frac{1}{2}-\frac{1}{4} \delta_{f, \frac{1}{2}}\right) 2^{-2 L(1-f)}
$$
The second moment of the distribution $\sigma_{\mathrm{P}}$ is exponentially small in $L$, and scales as $\sqrt{1 / d}$ at $f=1 / 2$ :
$$
\sigma_{\mathrm{P}}\left(f=\frac{1}{2}\right) \approx \frac{1}{2} \sqrt{2^{-L}} .
$$
Note that $\sigma_{\mathrm{P}} / \mu_{\mathrm{P}} \ll 1$, meaning that the entropy of a typical random state will only have a tiny fluctuation. 

### Bianchi-Dona distribution

BD distribution appears in Ref. [[PRX Quantum 3, 030201 (2022)](https://journals.aps.org/prxquantum/abstract/10.1103/PRXQuantum.3.030201)]. BD considered systems with an additive **local charge** which decomposes between a bipartition of the system into subsystems $A$ and $B$ as $M=M_A+M_B$. The Hilbert space $\mathcal{H}(M)$ of states with fixed charge $M$ no longer has a tensor product structure:
$$
\mathcal{H}(M)=\bigoplus_{M_A=\min \left(0, M-L_B\right)}^{\max \left(M, L_A\right)} \mathcal{H}_A\left(M_A\right) \otimes \mathcal{H}_B\left(M-M_A\right)
$$
The dimensions of each Hilbert subspace are
$$
d_{A, M_A}= \left(\begin{array}{c}L_A \\ M_A\end{array}\right),\ 
d_{B, M-M_A}=\left(\begin{array}{c}L-L_A \\ M-M_A\end{array}\right),\ 
d_M =\sum_{M_A} d_{A, M_A} d_{B, M-M_A}=\left(\begin{array}{l}L \\ M\end{array}\right).
$$
A random state $\left|\Psi_M\right\rangle$ with a fixed total charge can be expressed as a superposition of orthonormal basis states:
$$
\left|\Psi_M\right\rangle=\sum_{M_A} \sum_{\alpha=1}^{d_{A, M_A}} \sum_{\beta=1}^{d_{B, M-M_A}} \psi_{\alpha, \beta}^{\left(M_A\right)}\left|\alpha, M_A\right\rangle \otimes\left|\beta, M-M_A\right\rangle.
$$
The entanglement entropy can then be expressed as
$$
S\left(\rho_{A, M}\right)=\sum_{M_A} p_{M_A} S\left(\rho_{A, M_A}\right)-p_{M_A} \log p_{M_A}.
$$
Note that

- the first term captures quantum correlations between configurations with a fixed particle number.
- The second term is the Shannon entropy of the number distribution $p_{M_A}$, which captures particle number correlations between the two halves, while 

The average entanglement entropy of the BD distribution is given by
$$
\begin{aligned}
\mu_{\mathrm{BD}}(f, m) \approx &\ -f L[m \log (m)+(1-m) \log (1-m)] \\
& -\sqrt{L} \delta_{f, 1 / 2} \sqrt{\frac{m(1-m)}{2 \pi}}\left|\log \left(\frac{1-m}{m}\right)\right| 
 +\frac{f+\log (1-f)}{2}-\frac{\delta_{f, 1 / 2} \delta_{m, 1 / 2}}{2},
\end{aligned}
$$
where $m=M / L$. Note that

- The first term is the volume law term that scales proportionately with $L_A=f L$.
- The prefactor accounts for the reduced Hilbert space dimension in the symmetry sector $M$. 
- When $f=1 / 2$, the EE has an additional $\sqrt{L}$ contribution which comes from a saddle point evaluation of the probability distribution of $m$. It vanishes at half-filling, $m=1/2$.

The authors argue that the $\mathrm{BD}$ distribution furnishes a better RMT ensemble for describing midspectrum eigenstates of local Hamiltonians even in the absence of additional symmetries. The effect of energy conservation alone can be captured, within certain approximations, by that of conservation of a local additive $U(1)$ charge. Consider an eigenstate 
$$
\left|\psi_E\right\rangle=\sum_{i j} c_{i j}\left|\epsilon_i\right\rangle_A\left|\epsilon_j\right\rangle_B.
$$
Deutsch proposed [[Phys. Rev. A 43, 2046 (1991)](https://journals.aps.org/pra/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevA.43.2046)] that Hamiltonian eigenstates could be modeled as random states in which $c_{i j}$ is a random matrix with a narrow bandwidth which approximately imposes that the sum of energies of the subsystems is approximately equal to $E: \delta E_{i j} \equiv \epsilon_i+\epsilon_j-E \approx 0$. 

The authors then approximate the midspectrum by $m=1/2$ BD distribution. The arguments above do not rule out the possibility of non-universal $\mathrm{O}(1)$ corrections in the mean EE induced by the truncation of the $c_{i j}$ matrix and the presence of the $H_{A B}$ term. Nevertheless, the agreement between $\mathrm{BD}$ and the Hamiltonian eigenstate distribution is surprisingly good.

## Leveraging static QMBS into period-doubled responses

Zhi-Cheng Yang [[arXiv:2305.11368](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11368)] considers the quasi-symmetric scars with $T$-period driving:
$$
H(t) = H_A + J Q^z + \lambda(t)Q^a.
$$
The scar subspace is denoted as $\mathcal{W}$ and $H_A|_\mathcal{W}=0$. Note that the Floquet dynamics will not leave $\mathcal W$. The Floquet operator $U_F$ in the subspace $\mathcal{W}$ takes a particularly simple form:
$$
U_F|_{\mathcal{W}} 
=\mathcal{T} \exp \left\{-i\left[(J T) Q^z+\int_0^T d t \lambda(t) Q^a\right]\right\}
\equiv \exp [-i \phi(\hat{\boldsymbol{n}} \cdot \boldsymbol{Q})].
$$
Choosing an appropriate driving term $\lambda(t)Q^a$, the system will have double period evolution.

### Spin-1/2 chain example

Consider Floquet model
$$
H(t)= \frac{J}{4}\sum_i \sigma_{i-1}^z \sigma_{i+2}^z (1-\vec\sigma_i\cdot\vec\sigma_{i+1})
+\Omega \sum_i \sigma_i^x+\lambda(t) \sum_i \sigma_i^y.
$$
We choose a three-step square-pulse driving protocol:
$$
\lambda(t)= \begin{cases}-\lambda, & 0 \leqslant t \leqslant \frac{T}{4} \\ \lambda, & \frac{T}{4}<t \leqslant \frac{3 T}{4} \\ -\lambda, & \frac{3 T}{4}<t \leqslant T\end{cases}.
$$
The Floquet operator projected to subspace $\mathcal{W}$ is simple:
$$
U_F|_{\mathcal{W}}=\exp{\left[-i\frac{T}{4}\sum_i\left(\Omega\sigma_i^x-\lambda\sigma_i^y\right)\right]} 
\exp{\left[-i\frac{T}{2}\sum_i\left(\Omega\sigma_i^x+\lambda\sigma_i^y\right)\right]}
\exp{\left[-i\frac{T}{4}\sum_i\left(\Omega\sigma_i^x-\lambda\sigma_i^y\right)\right]}.
$$
Using the fact $e^{-i \hat{\boldsymbol{n}} \cdot \boldsymbol{\sigma} \phi/2}=\cos (\phi/2)-i(\hat{\boldsymbol{n}} \cdot \boldsymbol{\sigma}) \sin(\phi/2)$, we can calculate $\phi$ using `Mathematica`:

```mathematica
U1=MatrixExp[-I*T/4*{{0,Omg+I*Lbd},{Omg-I*Lbd,0}}];
U2=MatrixExp[-I*T/2*{{0,Omg-I*Lbd},{Omg+I*Lbd,0}}];
Uf=U1.U2.U1;
ans=FullSimplify[Tr[Uf]/2, Assumptions -> Omg>0 && T>0 && Lbd>0];
ans/.{Omg->\[CapitalOmega], Lbd->\[Lambda]}
```

The result is
$$
\cos\frac{\phi}{2}
=\frac{\lambda ^2+\Omega ^2 \cos \left(T \sqrt{\lambda ^2+\Omega ^2}\right)}{\lambda ^2+\Omega ^2}
= \cos ^2 \frac{\varphi}{2}-\frac{\phi_1^2-\phi_2^2}{\phi_1^2+\phi_2^2} \sin ^2 \frac{\varphi}{2},
$$
where $\phi_1=\Omega T$, $\phi_2=\lambda T$, and $\varphi=\sqrt{\phi_1^2+\phi_2^2}$. 
