# May 29

## LSM Theorem in Lindbladian

Based on today's arXiv: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16496, by Kohei Kawabata, Ramanjit Sohal, and Shinsei Ryu.

The authors derive an LSM-like theorem that constrains the dissipative gap, assuming

1. Lattice translation invariance, $\mathcal{T} \mathcal{L T}^{-1}=\mathcal{L}$. 
2. $\mathrm{U}(1)$ symmetry in the individual ket and bra spaces, $U_{ \pm} \mathcal{L} U_{ \pm}^{-1}=\mathcal{L}$, which yields a conserved charge $N_{ \pm}$. 

They focus on the steady-state subspace with $N_{+}=N_{-}$ and define the filling number $\nu:=N_{ \pm} / V$. 

The main result is the following theorem:

> **Theorem**. In open quantum systems with lattice translation invariance and strong U (1) symmetry, if the Lindbladian is gapped and exhibits a unique steady state in the subspace with the fixed U (1) charge, the filling number $\nu$ is required to be an integer. In other words, if $\nu$ is not an integer, the Lindbladian is gapless or exhibits degenerate steady states.

### The original LSM theorem

In [Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 1535 (2000)](https://journals.aps.org/prl/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevLett.84.1535), Oshikawa considered a periodic fermion system, with a magnetic flux $\Phi$ piercing through the ring. When the system is in the ground state $\left|\Psi_0\right\rangle$ at $\Phi=0$, $\left|\Psi_0\right\rangle$ is also an eigenstate of the momentum:
$$
P_x\left|\Psi_0\right\rangle=P_x^0\left|\Psi_0\right\rangle.
$$
The magnetic flux can be represented by the uniform vector potential $A_x=\Phi / L$ in the $x$ direction. During the adiabatic process, the Hamiltonian always commutes with $T_x$. When the magnetic flux reaches the unit flux quantum $\Phi_0$, the original ground state evolves into some state $\left|\Psi_0^{\prime}\right\rangle$. When $\Phi=\Phi_0$, the energy spectrum is identical to the zero flux case since the vector potential is eliminated by the large gauge transformation
$$
U=\exp \left(\frac{2 \pi i}{L} \sum_{j=1}^L j n_{j}\right),\quad
U H\left(\Phi_0\right) U^{-1}=H(0).
$$
On the other hand, in the presence of a finite excitation gap, the ground state $\left|\Psi_0\right\rangle$ can be transformed only into itself or, possibly, into another one of the degenerate ground states. However,  after the gauge transformation, $\left|\Psi_0^{\prime}\right\rangle$ is transformed to $U\left|\Psi_0^{\prime}\right\rangle$, which may belong to a different eigenvalue. By using the identity $U^{-1} T_x U=T_x e^{2 \pi i \nu}$, we see that $U\left|\Psi_0^{\prime}\right\rangle$ is an eigenstate of $P_x$ with $P_x=$ $P_x^0+2 \pi \nu$. Thus, if we choose $\nu$ to be fractional, $U\left|\Psi_0^{\prime}\right\rangle$ is orthogonal to $\left|\Psi_0\right\rangle$, because it belongs to a different eigenvalue of $P_x$. By repeating the same procedure several times, we can conclude that there are at least $q$ degenerate ground states.

## Boson Hubbard Model

Hamiltonian for the Bose-Hubbard model is
$$
H = -t \sum_{\langle i,j\rangle} (b_i^\dagger b_j+h.c.)+\frac{U}{2}\sum_i n_i(n_i-1)-\mu\sum_i n_i.
$$
Using `EDKit`, 

```julia
using LinearAlgebra, EDKit, Plots
L = 60
N_tot = 4

#basis = TranslationalBasis(L=L, N=N_tot, k=0, base=N_tot+1)
basis = TranslationParityBasis(BigInt, L=L, N=N_tot, k=0, p=1, base=N_tot+1)
function Hamiltonian(t,U,u,B)
  b = diagm(-1 => sqrt.(N_tot:-1:1))
  n = diagm(N_tot:-1:0)
  h1 = -t * (kron(b', b) + kron(b, b'))
  h2 = U/2 * n*(n-I) - u*n
  trans_inv_operator(h1,2,B) + trans_inv_operator(h2,1,B)
end

ham = Hamiltonian(1, 0.5, 0, basis)
vals, vecs = eigen(Hermitian(ham))
ent = [ent_S(vecs[:,i],1:2,basis) for i in axes(vecs,2)]
scatter(vals, ent)
```

